== Improving Wikipedia Reference Integrity with Persistent LinkIDs ==

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Field !! Value
|-
| '''Type''' || Working session + demo
|-
| '''Presenter''' || Christian Nyffenegger ([[User:ChristianN-LinkGenetic|ChristianN-LinkGenetic]])
|-
| '''Phabricator''' || [[phab:T422252]]
|-
| '''Duration''' || 90 min (60 min working session + 30 min demo / open discussion)
|-
| '''Skill level''' || All welcome — no prior knowledge required
|-
| '''Looking for''' || MediaWiki/Lua developers · Bot operators · Wikidata contributors · Policy/governance discussants
|}

=== What is this about? ===

Wikipedia's references are its epistemic backbone — yet tens of millions of them are broken or silently misleading due to '''link rot''' (dead URLs) and '''content drift''' (URLs that resolve but whose content has changed). Current mitigations are reactive and incomplete.

This session presents two complementary tools that address both failure modes:

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Product !! Role
|-
| '''LinkManager''' || Monitors URLs inside Wikipedia articles — detects link rot and content drift, repairs them automatically or proposes fixes
|-
| '''LinkID''' || Replaces fragile URLs with persistent <code>linkid:</code> identifiers — so references never rot or drift at the structural level
|}

Together they form a two-layer reference resilience system: LinkManager handles the existing corpus reactively; LinkID prevents future failures structurally. A migration bot (UC-6) bridges the two — LinkManager identifies vulnerable legacy citations, LinkID permanently replaces them.

=== What will we work on? ===

The session has two parts:

'''1. Hands-on hacking (60 min)'''

* '''UC-1 (LinkManager)''': prototype link rot detection and automatic healing in a Wikipedia article
* '''UC-3 (LinkID)''': prototype a <code>|linkid=</code> parameter for the <code>{{cite web}}</code> template on a MediaWiki sandbox
* '''UC-6 (Combined)''': sketch the bot-assisted migration design — LinkManager identifies → LinkID replaces
* '''UC-5 (LinkID)''': explore a Wikidata property proposal for <code>P_linkid</code>

'''2. Demo + open discussion (30 min)'''

* Live demo: LinkManager × Wikipedia — link rot detection and content drift alerting
* Live demo: LinkID resolver — persistent citation that always resolves
* Community questions: governance, deployment model, data sovereignty, integration with InternetArchiveBot and Citoid
* How can both tools be governed and hosted by WMF, fully on WMF infrastructure?

=== Who should join? ===

* '''MediaWiki / Lua / PHP developers''' — help prototype the <code>{{cite web}}</code> and LinkManager integrations
* '''Bot operators''' — discuss migration bot design and InternetArchiveBot integration path
* '''Wikidata contributors''' — explore the <code>P_linkid</code> property proposal
* '''Anyone interested in reference quality''' — come to the demo, ask hard questions

=== Resources ===

* GitHub (specs, SDKs, use cases): https://github.com/Link-Genetic-Inc/lid
* Wikimedia use cases: https://github.com/Link-Genetic-Inc/lid/tree/main/Wikimedia%20Hackathon%202026
* Demo (LinkManager × Wikipedia): https://linkmanager.linkgenetic.com/integrations/wikipedia
* Loom walkthrough: https://www.loom.com/share/614350752f0d426ca943db03b4aea24b
* Resolver (live): https://linkid.io
* WICG Proposal: https://github.com/WICG/proposals/issues/238

=== A note on governance ===

Both LinkManager and LinkID can be deployed '''fully on WMF infrastructure''', with no dependency on external services.
Both are available under the LPIL (Public Interest License) — free for Wikimedia, libraries, universities, and government.
This is not a product pitch. The goal is to design, together with the community, what a trustworthy and open reference resilience layer for Wikipedia should look like.
